---
layout: post
title: A Rant on Job Applications 
subtitle: Here we go again  
---

I’ve just returned from a week vacation in the beautiful island of St. Lucia.  I come armed with more energy to keep searching for the next opportunity. In 2017 applying for certain jobs can be a huge pain.  Depending on the size of the company you’re never really even guaranteed to get an email confirmation saying your application was received (until weeks later), I’ve had this happen with Facebook a few times.

I think one of my biggest gripes with applying for some of these larger more established companies is the application process itself.  Sites that use the Oracle/Taleo system are almost an immediate turn away for me, I think a lot of people would agree.  If it’s a company site you’ve never visited, you’re almost guaranteed to have to go through the painful process of creating a new profile (don’t worry, you won’t remember your login when you come back months later), then being forced to fill out every detail of your entire life.  More frustrating is a lot of these sites won’t let you bypass optional fields such as references, etc.  It doesn’t make any sense to have references required at such an early stage of the process, that doesn’t even necessarily guarantee you’re going to ever hear back.  You just spent near an hour filling out near useless information to be stored in some database for years to come.  

This is one thing I have come to appreciate about younger companies and startups as well, the simplified process of submitting your resume (Greenhouse comes to mind immediately ).  Most of the time it’s simply a matter of filling out your name, number, email , *why you might love to work for x company* and an area to attach your resume.  This is all it really should be!  It’s quick, informative and if it captures someone’s attention and passes the filters hopefully you’ll hear back.

Cover letters are seeming to become less common, and I’ve been told by a number of recruiters that they don’t even waste time reading them, sort of like professional summaries - lets face it, most of the time it sounds like the most manufactured statement that recruiters are probably rolling their eyes at- because your ‘mission’ sounds just like the other 75 resumes they read that day.  I still think a cover letter can be great if it’s a company you may know really well, or to be able to expound on why you may be a great fit for said position.  When I really care about a possible prospect, I will most certainly write a cover letter, the last one I did landed me an interview and eventually a free flight cross-country.  In this case it was beneficial because the interviewer had applied through a similar process and showed excitement in their cover letter, so they aren’t completely useless, but shouldn’t be a requirement.  If you care about a company you’ll probably take the time to do one or show excitement for the position somehow.   I recently spent around 45 minutes applying to a major broadcasting company, knowing that chances are probably little to none in terms of hearing back.  However it’s completely reasonable to understand that you may not ever hear back, with the sheer volume of people applying for said position at $largeCompany , coupled with being able to pass the software filters for applications.

It pretty much goes without saying that of course not every application gets lost, and not everyone denied - but after you’ve been doing it for a while you can’t help but feel a stream of helplessness.  As always, having a recruiter or friend will probably always be more beneficial than ‘cold’ applying.  Some companies even have systems in place to streamline candidates that have been referred or the employers are simply fond of.
